[[appendices]]
= Appendices

:numbered!:

[appendix]
== Support Content
This appendix provides generic information about used classes and
material in this reference documentation.

=== Classes Used in This Document

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::samples/States.java[tags=snippetA]
----

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::samples/States2.java[tags=snippetA]
----

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::samples/States3.java[tags=snippetA]
----

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::samples/Events.java[tags=snippetA]
----

[appendix]
== State Machine Concepts
This appendix provides generic information about state machines.

=== Quick Example
Assuming we have states _STATE1_, _STATE2_ and events _EVENT1_,
_EVENT2_, logic of state machine can be defined as shown in below
quick example.

image::images/statechart0.png[width=500]

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::samples/IntroSample.java[tags=snippetA]
----

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::samples/IntroSample.java[tags=snippetB]
----

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::samples/IntroSample.java[tags=snippetC]
----

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::samples/IntroSample.java[tags=snippetD]
----

[glossary]
=== Glossary

*State Machine*::
Main entity driving a collection of states together with regions,
transitions and events.

*State*::
A state models a situation during which some invariant condition
holds. State is the main entity of a state machine where state changes
are driven by an events.

*Transition*::
A transition is a relationship between a source state and a target
state. It may be part of a compound transition, which takes the state
machine from one state configuration to another, representing the complete
response of the state machine to an occurrence of an event of a
particular type.

*Event*::
An entity which is send to a state machine which then drives a various
state changes.

*Initial State*::
A special state in which the state machine starts. Initial state is
always bound to a particulal state machine or a region. A state
machine with a multiple regions may have a multiple initial states.

*End State*::
Also called as a final state is a special kind of state signifying
that  the enclosing region is completed. If the enclosing region is
directly contained in a state machine and all other regions in the
state machine also are completed, then it means that the entire state
machine is completed.

*History State*::
A pseudo state which allows a state machine to remember its last
active state. Two types of history state exists, _shallow_ which only
remember top level state and _deep_ which remembers active states in a
sub-machines.

*Choice State*::
A pseudo state which allows to make a transition choice based of i.e.
event headers or extended state variables.

*Fork State*::
A pseudo state which gives a controlled entry into a regions.

*Join State*::
A pseudo state which gives a controlled exit from a regions.

*Region*::
A region is an orthogonal part of either a composite state or a state
machine. It contains states and transitions.

*Guard*::
Is a boolean expression evaluated dynamically based on the value of
extended state variables and event parameters. Guard conditions affect
the behavior of a state machine by enabling actions or transitions
only when they evaluate to TRUE and disabling them when they evaluate
to FALSE.

*Action*::
A action is a behaviour executed during the triggering of the
transition.

[[crashcourse]]
=== A State Machines Crash Course
This appendix provides generic crash course to a state machine
concepts.

==== States
A state is a model which a state machine can be in. It is always
easier to describe state as a real world example rather than trying to
abstract concepts with a generic documentation. For example lets take
a simple example of a keyboard most of us are using every single day.
If you have a full keyboard which has normal keys on a left side and
the numeric keypad on a right side you may have noticed that the
numeric keypad may be in a two different states depending whether
numlock is activated or not. If it is not active then typing will
result navigation using arrows, etc. If numpad is active then typing
will result numbers to be used. Essentially numpad part of a keyboard
can be in two different states.

To relate state concept to programming it means that instead of using
flags, nested if/else/break clauses or other impractical logic you
simply rely on state, state variables or other interaction with a
state machine.

==== Pseudo States
PseudoState is a special type of state which usually introduces more
higher level logic into a state machine by either giving a state a
special meaning like initial state. State machine can then internally
react to these states by doing various actions available in UML state
machine concepts.

===== Initial
*Initial pseudostate* state is always needed for every single state
machine whether you have a simple one level state machine or more
complex state machine composed with submachines or regions. Initial
state simple defines where state machine should go when it starts and
without it state machine is ill-formed.

===== End
*Terminate pseudostate* which is also called as end state will indicate
that a particular state machine has reached its final state. Effectively
this mean that a state machine will no longer process any events and will
not transit to any other state. However in a case of submachines are
regions, state machine is able to restart from its terminal state.

===== Choice
*Choice pseudostate* is used to choose a dynamic conditional branch of
a transition from this state. Dynamic condition is evaluated by guards
so that at least one and at most one branch is selected. Usually a
simple if/elseif/else structure is used to make sure that at least one
branch is selected. Otherwise state machine might end up in a deadlock
and configuration would be ill-formed.

===== History
*History pseudostate* can be used to remember a last active state
configuration. After state machine has been exited, history state can
be used to restore previous knows configuration. There are two types
of history states available, _SHALLOW_ only remember active state of a
state machine itself while _DEEP_ also remembers nested states.

History state could be implemented externally by listening state
machine events but this would soon make logic very difficult to work
with, especially if state machine contains complex nested structures.
Letting state machine itself to handle recording of history states
makes things much simpler. What is left for user to do is simply do a
transition into a history state and state machine will hand the needed
logic to go back to its last known recorded state.

===== Fork
*Fork pseudostate* can be used to do an explicit entry into one or more regions.

image::images/statechart7.png[width=500]

Target state can be a parent state hosting regions, which simply
means that regions are activated by entering its initial states. It's
also possible to add targets directly to any state in a region which
allows more controlled entry into a state.

===== Join
*Join pseudostate* is used to merge several transitions together
originating from different regions. It it generally used to wait
and block for participating regions to get into its join target states.

image::images/statechart8.png[width=500]

Source state can be a parent state hosting regions, which means that
join states will be a terminate states of a participating regions.
It's also possible to define source states to be any state in a
regions which allows controlled exit from a regions.

==== Guard Conditions
Guard conditions are expressions which evaluates either to *TRUE* or
*FALSE* based on extended state variables and event parameters. Guards
are used with actions and transitions to dynamically choose if
particular action or transition should be executed. Aspects of guards,
event parameters and extended state variables are simply to make state
machine desing much more simple.

==== Events
Event is the most used trigger behaviour to drive a state machine.
There are other ways to trigger behaviour to happen in state machine
like a timer but events are the ones which really allows user to
interact with a state machine. Events are also called as signals to
possibly alter a state machine state.

==== Transitions
A transition is a relationship between a source state and a target
state. A switch from a state to another is a _state transition_ caused
by a _trigger_.

===== Internal Transition
Internal transition is used when action needs to be executed without
causing a state transition. With internal transition source and target
state is always a same and it is identical with self-transition in the
absence of state entry and exit actions.

===== External vs. Local Transition
Most of the cases external and local transition are functionally
equivalent expect in cases where transition is happening between super
and sub states. Local transition doesn't cause exit and entry to
source state if target state is a substate of a source state. Other
way around, local transition doesn't cause exit and entry to target
state if target is a superstate of a source state.

image::images/statechart4.png[width=500]

Above image shows a different between local and external transitions
with a very simplistic super and sub states.

==== Actions
Actions are the ones which really glues state machine state changes
with a users own code. State machine can execute action on various
changes and steps in a state machine like entering or exiting a state,
or doing a state transition.

Actions usually have access to a state context which gives running
code a choice to interact with a state machine in a various ways.
State context i.e. is exposing a whole state machine so user can
access extended state variables, event headers if transition is based
on an event, or actual transition where it is possible to see more
detailed where this state change is coming from and where it is going.

==== Hierarchical State Machines
Concept of a hierarchical state machine is used to simplify state
design when particular states can only exist together.

Hierarchical states are really an innovation in UML state machine over
a traditional state machines like Mealy or Moore machines.
Hierarchical states allows to define some level of abstraction is a
sense how java developer would define a class structure with abstract
classes. For example having a nested state machine user is able to
define transition on a multiple level of states possibly with a
different conditions. State machine will always try to see if current
state is able to handle an event together with a transition guard
conditions. If these conditions are not evaluated to true, state
machine will simply see what a super state can handle.

==== Regions
Regions which are also called as orthogonal regions are usually viewed
as exclusive OR operation applied to a states. Concept of a region in
terms of a state machine is usually a little difficult to understang
but things gets a little simpler with a simple example.

Some of use have a full size keyboard with main keys on a left side and numeric
keys on a right side. You've probably noticed that both sides really
have their own state which you see if you press a numlock key which
only alters behaviour of numbad itself. If you don't have a full size
keyboard you can buy a simple external usb numbad having only numbad
part of a keys. If left and right side can freely exist without the
other they must have a totally different states which means they are
operating on different state machines.

It would be a little inconvenient to handle two different
statemachines as totally separate entities because in a sense they are
still working together in a sense. This is why orthogonal regios can
combine together a multiple simultaneous states withing a single state
in a state machine.

